## 9.4.1 Electromagnetic Waves in Conductors

When we formulated our description of how electromagnetic waves move through linear media, we relied on the stipulation that the free charge density \( \rho_f \)  and free current density \( \vec J _f \) were zero. In the case of conductors, we're going to need to re-visit that assumption.

As a refresher, when we last took a good look at conductors we had just moved beyond the electrostatic picture. In statics, we could assume that the field within a conductor is always zero, because any field would eventually (quickly) cause the free changes to arrange in such a way as to cancel the field. Now, we want to see how the conductor responds when we have a varying electric field.

So, what do we already know about electric fields in matter?
$$
\div \vec E = \frac{\rho_f}{\epsilon} \qquad \text{(Gauss' Law in media)}
$$
$$
\div \vec J _f + \pdv{\rho_f}{t} = 0 \qquad \text{(Continuity)}
$$
$$
\vec J_f = \sigma \vec E \qquad \text{(Ohm's Law)}
$$

$$
\rightarrow \div \left( \frac{\vec J _f}{\sigma} \right) = \frac{\rho_f}{\epsilon}
$$
$$
\rightarrow \frac{1}{\sigma} \left( - \pdv{\rho_f}{t} \right) = \frac{\rho_f}{\epsilon}
$$
$$
\rightarrow \pdv{\rho_f}{t} = - \frac{\sigma}{\epsilon} \rho_f
$$

We see differential equations like this all the time - it's the equation for an exponential decay. The decay timescale of the free charge density is
$$
 \tau_{1/e} = \frac{\epsilon}{\sigma}
 $$ 

Applying to the situation of a very good conductor where \( \sigma \) is very large, e.g. copper, the time constant is around \( 10^{-19} \) seconds. This means that if a little bit of free charge has accumulated at any time, then from that point charge will flow to suppress that field on the timescale of \( 10^{-19} \) seconds. So, for the vast majority of radiation (wave period up to \( \approx 10^{-18} \)), the time constant is fast enough that the conductor is effectively impermeable, and all our previous descriptions of conductors are still sound. Namely, the Maxwell equations look like

$$
\div \vec E = 0
$$
$$
\div \vec B = 0
$$
$$
\curl \vec E = - \pdv{\vec B}{t}
$$
$$
\curl \vec B = \mu \epsilon \pdv{\vec E}{t} + \mu \sigma \vec E \qquad (\sigma \vec E = \vec J)
$$

As before, to get our wave equations, apply \( \curl (\curl \vec E) \) and \( \curl (\curl \vec B) \)
$$
\grad (\div \vec E) - \laplacian \vec E = - \curl (\pdv{\vec B}{t}) = - \pdv{}{t} (\curl \vec B)
$$
$$
\rightarrow - \laplacian \vec E = - \mu \epsilon \frac{\partial^2 \vec E}{\partial t^2} - \mu \sigma \pdv{\vec E}{t}
$$
$$
\rightarrow \laplacian \vec E = \mu \epsilon \frac{\partial ^2 \vec E}{\partial t^2} + \mu \sigma \pdv{\vec E}{t}
$$

As \( \sigma \rightarrow 0 \), we recover the wave equation for linear media as we'd expect. We now have a "lossy" wave equation, since there is attenuation of the wave over time.

From \( \curl ( \curl \vec B) \) we get
$$
\laplacian \vec B = \mu \epsilon \frac{\partial^2 \vec B}{\partial t^2} + \mu \sigma \pdv{\vec B}{t}
$$

Recall that for \( \sigma = 0 \) the wave equation supports waves of the form \( e ^{i(\vec k \cdot \vec r - \omega t)} \). For propagation along the z-axis, \( e^{i(kz - \omega t)} \). To solve the lossy version, we'll look for solutions by introducing an imaginary component to \( k \) in order to satisfy the damping term.

$$
\rightarrow \tilde{k} = k + i\kappa
$$

For the one-dimensional case, let's plug our new wave solution in

$$
\laplacian \vec E = \mu \epsilon \frac{\partial ^2 \vec E}{\partial t^2} + \mu \sigma \pdv{\vec E}{t}
$$
$$
\rightarrow - \tilde{k}^2 = \mu \epsilon (- \omega^2) + \mu \sigma (-i \omega)
$$
$$
\rightarrow k^2 - \kappa ^2 + 2 i k \kappa = \mu \epsilon \omega^2 + i \mu \sigma \omega
$$
$$
\rightarrow k^2 - \kappa ^2 = \mu \epsilon \omega \qquad 2 k \kappa = \mu \sigma \omega
$$
$$
\rightarrow k = \frac{ \mu \sigma \omega}{2 \kappa} \qquad \left( \frac{\mu \sigma \omega}{2 \kappa} \right)^2 - \kappa ^2 = \mu \epsilon \omega^2
$$
$$
\rightarrow \kappa ^4 + \mu \epsilon \omega^2 \kappa^2 - \left( \frac{\mu \sigma \omega}{2} \right)^2 = 0
$$
We just write down the solution to the quadratic equation in \( \kappa \) 

$$
\kappa = \sqrt{\frac{- \mu \epsilon \omega^2 \pm \sqrt{(\mu \epsilon \omega^2)^2 + (\mu \sigma \omega)^2}}{2}}
$$

Because we enforce that \( \kappa \) is real, and all of the parameters within the square root are positive, we need to choose the \( + \) sign
$$
\kappa = \sqrt{\frac{\sqrt{(\mu \epsilon \omega^2)^2 + (\mu \sigma \omega)^2} - \mu \epsilon \omega^2 }{2}}
$$
$$
\rightarrow \kappa = \sqrt{\frac{\mu \epsilon \omega^2}{2}} \sqrt{ \sqrt{ 1 + \left( \frac{\sigma}{\epsilon \omega} \right)^2 } - 1 }
$$
$$
\rightarrow \kappa = \omega \sqrt{ \frac{\epsilon \mu}{2} } \left[ \sqrt{ 1 + \left( \frac{\sigma}{\epsilon \omega} \right)^2 } - 1 \right] ^{1/2}
$$

Plugging \( \kappa \) back in to our expression for \( k \) and doing some algebraic manipulation,
$$
k = \omega \sqrt{ \frac{\epsilon \mu}{2}} \left[ \sqrt{1 + \left( \frac{\sigma}{\epsilon \omega} \right) ^2 } + 1 \right]^{1/2}
$$

So the fields look like

$$
\vec E ( z, t) = \vec{E_0} e^{- \kappa z} e^{i(kz - \omega t)}
$$
$$
\vec B ( z, t) = \vec{B_0} e^{- \kappa z} e^{i(kz - \omega t)}
$$

As a check, if \( \sigma \rightarrow 0 \), \( \kappa \rightarrow 0 \), \( k \rightarrow \omega \sqrt{ \frac{\epsilon \mu}{2}} \sqrt{2} = \omega \sqrt{ \epsilon \mu} = \omega / v \)  and we are back to the linear medium we started with. In the case of a really good conductor (where \(1 / \omega \gg \epsilon / \sigma \)), both \( k \) and \( \kappa \) will converge

$$
k \approx \kappa \rightarrow \omega \sqrt{\frac{\epsilon \mu}{2}} \left[ \frac{\sigma}{\epsilon \omega} \right] ^{1/2} \\
= \sqrt{ \omega \frac{\epsilon \mu}{2} \frac{\sigma}{\epsilon}} \\
= \sqrt{ \frac{ \omega \mu \sigma}{2}}
$$

For a good conductor, both \( \vec E \) and \( \vec B \) get damped over a distance scale given by \( 1/\kappa \), which can be quite short. Since \( k ~ \kappa \) we can relate this "skin depth" to the wavelength
$$
\lambda = \frac{2\pi}{k} \rightarrow d = \frac{1}{\kappa} = \frac{\lambda}{2 \pi}
$$

Before, we had a real proportionality factor between \( \vec{E_0} \) and \( \vec{B_0} \). If we go through the same motions here with our new lossy solution,
$$
\curl \vec E = - \pdv{\vec B}{t} \rightarrow \vec B _0 = \frac{\tilde{k}}{\omega} \vec E _0 
$$

Because \( \tilde{k} \) is a complex number, this ratio will also be a complex number. For our phasor expressions for the fields, this amounts to a phase shift between the two.

!!! info "In conductors, there is a phase difference between the \( \vec E \) and \( \vec B \) fields. For a good conductor, the phase shift is \( 45 ^\circ \)"

## 9.4.2: Reflection at a Conducting Surface


